# Data Structure

A data structure is a particular way of organizing data in a computer so, that it can be used effectively. The idea is to reduce the space and time complexities of different tasks.

```cpp
Algorithm + Data Structure = Program
```

Data structure mainly specifies (or dictates) the following four things:-

1. Organization of data
2. Accessing methods
3. Degree of associativity
4. Processing alternatives for information

## Classification of data structure

Data structures are normally divided into two broad categories.

```cpp
1. Primitive data structures
	i. integer
	ii. float
	iii. character
	iv. boolean
2. Non-primitive data strcuture
	i. arrays
	ii. lists
		a. linear lists
			I. Stack
			II. Queues
		b. non-linear lists
			I. Graphs
			II. Trees
	iii. files
```

### Primitive data structure

These are basic structures and directly operated upon by the machine instructions.

The data structures, typically those data structure that are directly operated upon by machine level instructions i.e., the fundamental data types such as int, float, double in-case of ‘c’ are known as primitive data structures.

- Primitive data structures are called as built-in data structures

### Non-primitive data structure

- Which data structures are made up of primitive data structures are called derived/non-primitive data structure

The data structures, which are not primitive, are called non-primitive data structures.

There are two types of non-primitive data structures.

### Linear Data Structures: 

- A **linear data structures has** data elements connected to each other so that elements are arranged in a sequential manner and each element is connected to the element in front of it and behind it.

A list, which shows the relationship of adjacency between elements, is said to be a linear data structure. 

The most, simplest linear data structure is a 1-D array, but because of its deficiency, list is frequently used for different kinds of data.

### Non-linear data structure: 

A list, which doesn’t show the relationship of adjacency elements, is said to be non-linear data structure.

### File
- A file is a collection of digital data stored on a disk as a single object.
Files can be organized into directories or folders to create a hierarchical structure, allowing for efficient storage, retrieval, and management of data.

### Abstract Data Type/Data Structure

An Abstract Data Type (ADT) is an abstract of data structure which provide only the interface to which a data structure must adhere to. The interface does not give any specific details about now something should be implemented or in what programming language.

- An Abstract Data Type have its own values and operations on those values.

**Example**

| Abstraction (ADT) | Implementation (DS) |
| --- | --- |
| List | Dynamic Array, Linked list |
| Queue | Linked list base queue, array-based queue, stack-based queue |
| Map | Tree map, Hash map/Hash Table |
| Vehicle | Golf cart, bicycle, Smart car. |

**OPERATION ON DATA STRUCTURES AND ITS COST ESTIMATION:**

The four major operations performed on data structures are:

- **Insertion/Creation:** Insertion means adding new details or new node into the data structure.
- **Deletion/Destroy:** Deletion means removing a node from the data structure or deleting some information
- **Traversal/Selection: -** Traversing means accessing each node exactly once so that the nodes of a data structure can be processed. Traversing is also called as visiting.

- ************Updation:-************ Update or modify data.

Apart from the four operations mentioned above, there are two more operations occasionally performed on data structures. They are:

- **Searching: -** Searching means finding the location of node for a given key value.
- **Sorting: -** Sorting means arranging the data in a particular order.
- **Merging: -** Merging means joining two lists
